# Adaptogens
> Source: https://naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.com/Data/ProMonographs/Adaptogens

## Patient Handout

---

- English
- Spanish
- French

Table of Contents

- Overview
- Safety
- Adverse Effects
- Effectiveness
- Administration / Application
- Interactions with Drugs
- Interactions with Supplements
- Interactions with Conditions
- Interactions with Lab Tests
- Theory / Mechanism of Action
- Classes
- References

Help
Print
Feedback External Link

# Adaptogens
Other Common Names , Adaptogènes, Adaptógenos
|

---

## Overview

Adaptogens are a class of natural substances that are believed to increase an organism's ability to adapt and avoid damage from various harmful factors. The word adaptogen comes from the Latin word adaptare, meaning to adjust or fit, and the Greek word gen, meaning produced by or generated by. In essence, an adaptogen generates the ability to adapt or adjust ( 95475 , 95479 ). Traditionally, adaptogens are thought to stimulate non-specific resistance against physical, environmental and emotional stress. In this definition, the term stress refers to a state that threatens homeostasis ( 95476 , 95479 ). Certain adaptogenic plants have been used in the traditional  Ayurvedic and Chinese systems of medicine for centuries. Adaptogens are now also used for stress-induced fatigue, cognitive function, mental illness, and behavioral disorders ( 95477 ). Although a number of plants are referred to as adaptogens, only some plants have demonstrated these properties in laboratory or clinical research ( 95476 ). Refer to this list of Adaptogens to find more information on specific plants.

Adaptogens represent a wide group of natural medicines that are used alone or in combination. See specific monographs for safety information.

PREGNANCY AND LACTATION: See specific monographs for safety information.

#### General

Adaptogens represent a wide group of natural medicines, some of which can cause adverse effects. See specific monographs for safety information.

Adaptogens represent a wide group of natural medicines that are used alone or in combination. See specific monographs for effectiveness information.

Adaptogens represent a wide group of natural medicines. These are sometimes used as single agents or in combination. See specific monographs for dosing information.

None known.

Adaptogens represent a wide group of natural medicines that are used alone or in combination. See specific monographs for interaction information.

Adaptogens represent a wide group of natural medicines that are used alone or in combination. See specific monographs for interaction information.

Adaptogens represent a wide group of natural medicines that are used alone or in combination. See specific monographs for interaction information.

#### General

To be considered an adaptogen, a substance must have three qualities: non-specific protective action, normalizing influence, and innocuous function. Non-specific protective action refers to the adaptogen's ability to provide general resilience against physical, chemical, and biological stressors.  Adaptogens are expected to have general, rather than specific, effects. For instance, an adaptogen is expected to protect against biological stressors such as bacterial infections. Adaptogens are also thought to decrease cortisol release and other measures of stress response against physical stressors such as extreme cold or heat. Finally, adaptogens are expected to reduce adverse effects of biological toxins such as ethanol, cyclophosphamide, bleomycin, and others ( 95476 , 95480 ). The expected normalizing or stabilizing influence of an adaptogen implies the ability to regulate abnormalities triggered by stressors and to promote homeostasis. For example, if certain hormones or other biological markers are too low or too high, the adaptogen helps to return these markers to baseline levels ( 95476 , 95479 , 95480 ). Innocuous function implies that an adaptogen does not harm normal body function and does not cause adverse effects. Adaptogen activity is thought to be accomplished via antioxidant and immunomodulating effects ( 95476 , 95480 ) and is thought to promote longevity, improve body maintenance and repair, and increase resilience to situations that threaten homeostasis ( 95479 ). Adaptogens are hypothesized to have therapeutic effects on stress-induced fatigue, cognitive function, mental illness, and behavioral disorders via the immune and neuroendocrine system ( 95479 ). One theory for this activity proposes that adaptogens reduce inflammation via the immune system and reduce the stress response via the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis ( 95478 ). In another theory, it is proposed that adaptogens increase the levels of all biomarkers of basal homeostasis. This entails promoting equally increased levels of "switch on" chemicals, such as nitric oxide (NO) and catecholamines, and "switch off" chemicals, such as cortisol and prostoglandin-2. This overall increase is thought to reduce the overall reactivity of the organism to stressors ( 95477 ).

### Classes
Adaptogens

---

### References
See Monograph References

---

Literature Review Current Through: 10/2/2025, Last Updated: 10/2/2025

The contents of this resource are not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Clinical input is needed from a qualified healthcare provider before taking any supplement or starting any therapy. Do not delay or disregard seeking medical advice or treatment based on any information displayed in this resource.